Cost-benefit analysis

Possibly the most significant trade-off we made involved developer time and project scope. Our project consists of both a forum and a diet/nutrition service, which will require significantly more effort to develop than either of those elements alone. We believe however that this is a necessary trade-off, as internet forums alone have proven impotent at stemming the obesity epidemic, and a diet application alone would not be capable of building the community necessary to bring about widespread dietary change, so a combination of the two is necessary. Current approaches have failed so dramatically that a revolutionary approach is necessary to have any hope of bring about real change.

Another decision we faced was regarding the openness of our API. Keeping the API closed would increase the "lock in" of the application were it to become successful, potentially generating greater revenue. Opening the API however allows other developers to build upon it, facilating the further development of the community around the site, even if this development occurs in a manner that leads some users to spent less time on the site itself. As the goal of the site is society-wide improvement in health outcomes, sacrificing potential revenue seems like an acceptable price to pay for increasing the reach of the site's ability to promote good health and diet.

We also faced many trade-offs in the design of our forum. We chose to forgo a strict moderation policy of the kind followed by Stack Overflow, which necessitates more work on our part to design a system such that threads can still remain on topic without being derailed by tangential discussion. We believe this effort is ultimately worth it, as it creates a warmer environment for users, avoiding the kind of resentment many potential users have developed for Stack Overflow. The way our system allows harmonious coexistence of core threads and tangents also potentially provides a smoother, more intuitive UI experience for users, although this approach will of course be more challenging to get right.

How to handle registered health and dietary professionals' use of the site also required some thought. We considered giving them extra voting power on verification of their qualifications, to encourage their participation, but ultimately decided against it, as it would undermine the democratic goals of the site. We instead chose to grant them special flairs, which will make their professional state visible to other users, but will not privilege them.

The decision regarding whether to initially focus our application functionality more on diet or fitness was also a matter requiring significant consideration. Ultimately we settled on nutrition, as it may be more applicable to the population as a whole: while not everyone exercises, everyone eats. There is also need for a diet recommendation service: while sites like https://www.myfitnesspal.com/ and http://www.fitday.com/ provide diet tracking, they don't provide recommendations or the ability to scan foods when shopping, and integrate only primitive forum technology.

Ultimately, the guiding principle behind our design has been: innovation is hard, but necessary. Deaths from preventable diet-related illnesses continue to rise, so if change is to be achieved then current online approaches to diet management must be transcended and replaced by something superior, as they clearly aren't working.