Design and functionality

To address users' needs for a dynamic, interactive health management system, our web application will include a simple interface for users to input their diet and receive dietary advice and information. They will be able to select foods through an autocompleted search bar, and when a food is slected they will see that food's nutrition info. They will be able to click a button to add this food to their diet.

They will also have a diet page, displaying their diet and summary nutrition statistics on it, and from this page will be able to use the same food search feature to add foods, or click on a food item in their diet to see detailed information. They can also remove foods, delete a diet, create a new diet, or switch to another saved diet (users can have multiple diets, but only one "active" diet that is used by default). Users will also be able to click a single button to be taken to a page containing interesting visualisations of the summary statistics.

There will be a prominent "recommendations" panel in which the user can receive recommendations on a particular food or food suggestions, and a button next to it to scan a food barcode if the user is on a mobile device.

This interface is designed to be as simple and intuitive of possible, to dramatically enhance the ease with which people can manage their diets. In the spirit of this, users will be able to receive recommendations immediately, however there will be a small note informing them that they can receive better recommendations if they input more health/weight etc. data. A separate page will exist where users can input this data, to whatever degree of detail they feel like, and a progress bar measuring how what percentage of information they've inputted. Internally, the recommendation algorithms will dynamically adapt to the information level of a particular user, producing better recommendations when a user has provided more information. Users will also get "points" and "badges" for providing information and completing their health/nutrition profile, the same as awared for contribution to the forums. Given sufficient time, a stretch-goal is to provide similar functionality for exercise, with users being able to select exercises and enter the time spent on these exercises, with the application calculating calories burned and taking account of this information in given dietary recommendations. Users would also be able to track their exercise history, and receive reminders of daily exercise.

Users will be able to create an account on the site directly, but will also be able to use OAuth to sign in via their Facebook or Google accounts. THe recommendation functionality will require login, but a page will exist with some useful utilities such as BMI calculation which doesn't require login.

For our Q&A forum, users will have the ability to post and answer questions, comment on answers, and upvote and downvote answers. They will also have a profile page in which they can view their "points" and "badges",  as well as their questions and answers. Users will have the option to upload formal qualifications for the site administration to view, and if the documents are deemed legitimate then these users' will be given flairs next to their comments/answers noting their qualification (e.g. doctor or nutritionist). Users will also have a preferences page, in which they can toggle the amswer/comment types that they'd like to see. Users with sufficient points or who have submitted official qualifications will be able to flag questions, comments and answers with various different kind of flags matching the different categories that users can choose to view/hide.

The exact format of the forum represents an innovative approach, allowing tangential discussion that often arises on such forums to coexist alongside discussion of the primary topic at hand, without interfering with or distracting from it. A general outline of the design is as follows, although we will test, iterate upon and refine the design through the development process.

**Insert Nan's diagrams (or reference to them in the Appendix, if they won't fit) here**

In terms of roles, Nan and Ray will focus on the diet planning and advice functionality, Jonathan and Bing will focus on the forum, and Regina will focus on API integration and diet planning.
