#Situational Assessment and Problem Statement

*very rushed piece, you have my apologies, fengfeng, if you don't have enough time to process it after thursday*
*more data showing people concerns about their health wanted.*

Health is a very basic topic that concerns everyone. When people type "maintaining healthy", "keep fitness" or "making diet" in search engines, billions of entries would come up showing how much people care about these issues. Seemingly there are a huge amount of websites and information behind these entries, but how useful or helpful are they for a general person who wishes to generally maintain his/her health?

There are two particular problems stopping general public from better making use of web applications to better maintaining generally healthy. Firstly, the majority of current health-oriented websites are dedicated to serious fitness. These websites may not be suitable for the population who wishes to just generally keep healthy, such as to eat nutritional food and do general exercise after work. Secondly, there are websites that provides food nutritional information, and some other are majorly a forum for ideas exchange, but hardly anyone provide personal health-tracking and assisting services, which is essential for the group of people seeking keeping "easy" healthy. 

The general health aspect has actually been proven important. People inevitably do several light exercises such as walking, climbing stairs etc. and they have to have nutrition intake via eating. These basic things however can play important role in people's general health. There are many applications/devices that gather information about people's heart rate, pace, walking distance etc. to monitor the users' situations about general exercise/fitness. These information may then be analysed by the associated local applications, however, generally good suggestions are not given. Also, there are very limited online-discussing features exist in these applications.

(stakeholders?)

By building an web application that aims to be general health oriented, the majority of people can finally have a place to store and share their health data easily, and can be given suggestions by the website assistant system or by professionals/other people keen on keeping health via forum. The benefit of such web application can potentially extend from users to operators, as several commercial services can therefore be bonded into the website. For instance, gymnasiums might want to have their name put on the very top of the list when people decided to attend one near their place, or supermarkets may want to provide up-to-date price for their wholesome food. Cooperations with smart devices that can gather relevant information - smartphones, smart bracelets, smart watches, etc. can also potentially make data-tracking easier, which may in turn promote their selling figure. This can be a triple-win situation: user are happy because they got a good assistant taking charge of their health, whilst relevant companies and the website developers could draw profit from the service.